>> James Halliday: Maybe now would be a
good time to talk a bit about permissions.
Every file on a Unix
system has permissions.
And how it works is there
are three main categories of
permissions that you can grant.
There's three kinds of permissions,
and three categories.
So there's this notion of the user,
the group, and other, or everybody.
And these are specified by
the shorthand U for the user,
which is the owner of the file, G for
the group, which is the group of the file,
and O for other,
which is anybody else on the system.
So, if you do ls -l,
you can see the permissions for any file.
In this case, a lot of systems these
days especially, will create a new group
called the same as your user names, so
it's a little bit confusing sometimes.
But if I go somewhere else on the system,
like if I ls -l says it
also by the user group.
Maybe there's a better spot,
let's see maybe in etc somewhere.
>> James Halliday: Okay so a few of
these things like this is the user and
this is the group, its shadow.
>> James Halliday: So this second piece
here, this is the user, the group.
This bit right here, is the permission.
So how you read this is, it goes,
U, G, O, so this is the user.
So the owner of the file,
the first one of these bits,
this column, has these permissions.
The user sub stack can read and
write to this file.
The group sub stack can
only read to the file, but
not write to the file, and
everybody else can only read that file.
They can't write to it,
and they can't execute it.
So there's also this other
piece of the permissions,
which is called the executable bit.
And how that works is for a directory, if
the executable bit is set it's an x here,
then that means that you can
list the directory contents.
So here if I ls logs I see the contents.
If I chmod -x logs, and try to ls logs,
I get Permission denied.
But then it does it anyways, that's weird.
[LAUGH] Probably because I
probably have to do it like this.
>> James Halliday: Yeah,
and you can set it back.
For scripts you might
recall that a moment ago we
did chmod +x, and the name of our
script because we wanted to execute it.
So here, that script logger has
its executable bit set, and
that just means that you
can run it as a program.
So for files the executable bit
means that you can run it, and for
directories the executable bit means
that you can list the contents.
>> James Halliday: If you wanna
see what groups your user is in,
you can type groups, and
then you see a list of stuff.
So, these are kinda standard things.
I have access to the video,
the audio, cdrom device,
I guess they still have that in computers,
also, bluetooth.
So the permissions in /dev for
example, are more interesting.
Because the user might be group,
but then you can
set different groups that
users are members of.
If someone is a member of the tty group,
they can read and
write depending, to these tty devices,
or they can read and
write to different kinds of dial out,
whatever that means.
It looks like it's for serial devices.
>> James Halliday: Lots of stuff there.
>> James Halliday: Right so the basic
thing to remember, is that it goes user,
group, other, ugo, and
then read, write, execute rwx.
So there's a way to set this
with numbers that you might
have seen before like chmod 644 or
whatever.
These correspond to the rwx in octal,
which is kind of confusing.
So how that works is the first number
is the user, the second is the group,
the final is the other, and then you
have to think in binary for a bit.
I don't usually use the octal codes, but
you might, see stuff on the internet
especially, that's written out in octal,
so it's just good to know how it works.
And how it works,
is you add 4 for writable.
So 4 for write, I think 2 for
read, and 1 for execute.
And you can figure out what it means
by decomposing the numbers into these.
So, how that works for example is
if a file is gonna be readable and
writable, that would be 4 plus 2 is 6.
If a file is gonna be readable, writable,
and executable, that would be 4 plus 2,
plus 1, is 7.
If a file is gonna be say, readable and
executable, that would be 2 plus 1 is 3.
That's basically how
the octal permissions work.
And then, it goes user, group, other.
>> James Halliday: Right,
so there's more written
in the notes if you need
to consult that piece.
And we've already used the chmod command,
but this is how you can set permissions.
So why don't we go ahead and
use that a bit more.
So if you ls -l,
now if I wanna change the permissions.
For example, say I wanna add
write permission to the group for
that file 2017 whatever, .log.
So I can do g, and then I wanna grant it,
so I can do +w for that file.
Now if I ls -l, I see that the group
before didn't have write permission, but
now it has write permission.
If I wanna take that permission away,
I can do minus.
And that is great,
you can also stack the command.
So if you wanna grant like say, group and
other permission at the same time,
you can do go or og, +w.
You can also stack the readable and
executables in a single go like this.
Sort of just a little bit of
shorthand that is sometimes handy.
If you wanna revoke everything, you can.
>> James Halliday: Do that as well.
>> James Halliday: Right.
>> James Halliday: So, just rwx and
ugo, user, group, other.
And plus and minus, and you just can
string those together however you like.